---
title: Introduction
parent: Cryptography
nav_order: 1
---

# Introduction to Modern Cryptography
Modern cryptography is one of the most important aspects of computer and communications security.
It is the backbone for securing banks, companies, governments, websites, and more.

## Modern vs Classical Cryptography

Classical cryptography operates on traditional characters that you would see in
your day-to-day life. Modern cryptography operates on the language of computers:
binary bit sequences.

## Primary Goals of Modern Cryptography

### Confidentiality
- If someone looks at a message, they will not be able to understand the message.

### Integrity
- If someone modifies our data, we will be able to detect it.

### Availability
- Information and systems will always be available to users even in the event of attacks and natural disasters.

## Cryptographic Algorithms
All cryptographic algorithms can be broken down into 3 parts:

### 1. Key Generation
Cryptographic algorithms require the use of a key to secure information. These keys must be randomly generated through some algorithm. Key generation can be represented by the function `KG()` which takes no parameters and returns a randomly generated key.

Some key generation algorithms do take input in order to make the key even more random. This input could look like the position of the mouse at the time of generating the key (and the key generation algorithm might prompt the user to move the mouse around). The most important part of key generation is that it produces as random of a key as possible.

### 2. Encryption
Encryption is the process of turning plaintext, like a password, and converting it into ciphertext. This encryption happens by combining this plaintext with a key with an algorithm. Encryption can be represented by the function `Enc(Msg, Key)`, which takes in a plaintext `Msg` and `Key`, and outputs a corresponding ciphertext `C`.

### 3. Decryption
Decryption is the opposite of encryption and is the process of turning ciphertext into a plaintext. Decryption can be represented by the function `Dec(C, Key)`, which takes in a ciphertext `C` and `Key` and outputs the corresponding plaintext `Msg`.

It's important to note that the keys used in encryption and decryption could be different or the same.

### Combining these parts together
For any cryptographic algorithm to work, the following equation must be true:

```
Msg = Dec(Enc(Msg, Key), Key)
```

This equation basically means that if you plug your message into the encryption part of the algorithm, and then plug the resulting ciphertext into the decryption part of the algorithm, you should get the exact same message you originally plugged in.

## Conclusion
In this section you learned what cryptography is and the basic components of cryptography. In future sections, you will learn more about the details of these various components and different encryption and decryption algorithms.

## Glossary

| Term         | Meaning
|:-------------|:------------------
| Plaintext    | Any piece of text that can be read or used directly.
| Ciphertext   | Text generated by an encryption algorithm that can't be read or used directly. Corresponds to a plaintext.
| Key          | A randomly generated string of characters that is used in encryption/decryption algorithms.
| Cryptography | The study of securing messages from 3rd parties.
| Party        | A person or group of persons that belong together.
| Confidentiality | A promise to keep information secret and private.
| Integrity    | A promise to keep information intact and safe from modification by those without permission.
| Availability | A promise to keep information and systems always accessable even throughout harsh events.

## Learn more
- [Tutorials Point](https://www.tutorialspoint.com/cryptography/modern_cryptography.htm)
- [CIA Triad by F5 Networks](https://www.f5.com/labs/articles/education/what-is-the-cia-triad)
- [CIA Triad by CertMike](https://www.certmike.com/confidentiality-integrity-and-availability-the-cia-triad/)
